FOR MILLIONS OF YEARS
HUMAN BEINGS HAVE
MADE USE OF THE WOOD
FROM THEIR FORESTS.
GENERATION AFTER
GENERATION THEY'VE
CUT THE TREES DOWN IN
ORDER TO BUILD BOATS
AND HOMES AS
WELL AS FOR FUEL.
IT WAS A SUSTAINABLE WAY
OF USING THIS RESOURCE.
TREES WERE CUT BUT THE
FOREST WAS RENEWED.
IN RECENT DECADES GLOBAL
DEFORESTATION HAS GOTTEN
OUT OF CONTROL WITH
NO END IN SIGHT.
WE HAVE BEEN DISCUSSING
THE DESTRUCTION
OF THE FORESTS AND
ITS CONSEQUENCES
FOR THREE DECADES.
FOR MORE THAN THREE
DECADES WE HAVE BEEN
WARNED THAT FORESTS
CONTAIN THE LARGEST
BIODIVERSITY
ON THE PLANET,
THAT THEY PLAY A CRUCIAL
ROLE IN CLIMATE REGULATION
AND THEY ARE THE
LARGEST ABSORBERS OF
CARBON-BASED GASES.
FORESTS PROTECT US FROM
FLOODS, REGULATE RAINFALL,
AND ABATE THE
GREENHOUSE EFFECT.
HOWEVER, AS WE BEGIN THE
21ST CENTURY, 75% OF OUR
FORESTS HAVE DISAPPEARED
OR ARE ABOUT TO DO SO.
TROPICAL RAINFORESTS IN
SOUTH AMERICA AND ASIA
ARE BEING SLASHED AND
BURNED AT AN ALARMING RATE
IN ORDER TO SATISFY THE
DEMANDS OF THE LUMBER
AND THE FOOD
INDUSTRIES.
MOST VIRGIN FOREST
AREAS CAN BE FOUND IN
THE AMAZON, RUSSIA,
AND CANADA
BUT AT THE CURRENT
RATE OF DEFORESTATION
THEY WILL HARDLY MAKE
IT INTO THE NEXT DECADE.
WITH EVERY YEAR THAT GOES
BY, THE RATE OF SLASHING
AND CASES OF FOREST
BURNING INCREASE.
DATA SUGGESTS THAT
DESTRUCTION IS ON THE RISE.
WE MUST THUS
ASK OURSELVES,
WHO IS DESTROYING
THE FORESTS?
WHO BENEFITS FROM THIS?
WHY ISN'T IT
BEING STOPPED?
AND ABOVE ALL, WHAT
CAN WE DO TO AVOID IT?
DEFORESTATION AND THE
EXPLOITATION OF FORESTS
HAVE A LONG HISTORY, AS OLD
AS THE HISTORY OF MANKIND.
ALTHOUGH TODAY
DEFORESTATION IS
CONSIDERED A PROBLEM, IT
USED TO BE CONSIDERED
A SOURCE OF DEVELOPMENT.
UNTIL JUST A FEW DECADES
AGO FORESTS WERE
CONSIDERED DARK AREAS
INHABITED BY EVIL SPIRITS
THAT DESERVED ONLY
TO BE EXPELLED.
QUITE OFTEN COMMUNITIES
HAVE THOUGHT OF FORESTS AS
BEING QUITE MENACING,
POPULATED BY DEMONS,
SORCERERS, AND
DANGEROUS ANIMALS.
THE ROOT OF THE
WORD "FOREST"
CONTAINS THE
PREFIX "FOR"
WHICH IN MANY INDO-EUROPEAN
LANGUAGES MEANS
"THAT WHICH IS FOREIGN",
"WHAT IS OUT OF USE",
WITH ALL THE LACK OF
TRUST ATTRIBUTED TO
PEOPLE AND THINGS THAT
ARE UNFAMILIAR TO US.
IN INDUSTRIALIZED NATIONS
THAT HAVE FORESTS,
MANY USE THE EXPRESSION
"FOREST PULL", WHICH REFERS
TO THE PHYSICAL AND
PSYCHIC PRESSURE
THAT THE FOREST EXERTS
ON ITS INHABITANTS.
TODAY FORESTS ARE
PERCEIVED BY PART OF THE
URBAN POPULATION OF
INDUSTRIALIZED NATIONS
AS ONE OF THE LAST REFUGES
OF TRUE NATURE - ESPECIALLY
THOSE FORESTS THAT HAVE
BARELY BEEN TOUCHED BY MAN.
THEY'RE ONE OF THE LINKS
THAT JOIN MAN TO THE WORLD
OF THE UNTOUCHED, THE
PRIMEVAL, A WORLD IN WHICH
SMALL GROUPS OF PEOPLE
LIVED OFF THE LAND
WITH AN EYE ON MAINTAINING
THEIR SURROUNDINGS
BY HUNTING AND GATHERING
THOSE PRODUCTS
THEY NEEDED IN
ORDER TO SUBSIST.
FROM THE TIME OF THE
ROMANS UNTIL AFTER
WORLD WAR II, THE
CUTTING DOWN OF FORESTS
WAS CONSIDERED A
SIGN OF PROGRESS.
THEIR DISAPPEARANCE WAS
EQUATED TO PRODUCTION
OF NEW BOATS, RAW
MATERIALS, AND ENERGY.
CLIMATE CHANGES DUE TO
DEFORESTATION WERE ALREADY
A PREOCCUPATION OF ROMAN
AUTHORITIES WHO WERE
AWARE OF NORTHBOUND
ADVANCES OF THE DESERT
IN PRESENT DAY TUNISIA,
ALGERIA AND LIBYA.
BACK THEN THE CLIMATE
WAS MUCH MORE HUMID
WHICH ENABLED FARMERS
TO GROW WHEAT.
THIS REGION, WHICH TODAY
IS PRACTICALLY A DESERT,
WAS ONCE THE BREADBASKET
OF THE EMPIRE.
THE CANARY ISLANDS ALSO
SUFFERED FROM DRASTIC
CLIMATE CHANGES BEFORE
THE INDUSTRIAL ERA.
CHRISTOPHER COLUMBUS IN
THE LOG BOOK OF HIS MAIDEN
VOYAGE COMMENTED IN 1492
ON HOW MUCH THE FORESTS ON
THE ISLANDS HAD SUFFERED
SINCE THE ARRIVAL
OF BETANCOURT
50 YEARS EARLIER.
BECAUSE IT WAS ALREADY
ALMOST A DESERT,
THE HUMIDITY FROM THE
ATLANTIC COULD NO LONGER
CONDENSE TO
FORM RAINFALL.
AS THE MIDDLE
AGES APPROACHED,
EUROPE BOASTED A DENSE
POPULATION OF TREES.
BY THE TENTH CENTURY MANY
OF THE FORESTS HAD ALREADY
DISAPPEARED AND MOST OF
THE ONES THAT WERE LEFT
WERE BEING REPLACED BY
FARMS AND PASTURES.
FAR FROM EUROPE,
DEFORESTATION
HAD ITS BEGINNINGS
IN THE COLONIAL ERA.
TROPICAL RAINFORESTS
HAVE BEEN INHABITED
FOR MILLIONS OF YEARS
BY NUMEROUS COMMUNITIES
THAT USED THEIR RESOURCES
IN MANY DIFFERENT WAYS
- EVEN IN AGRICULTURE.
IT WAS A TYPE OF
AGRICULTURE THAT HELPED
MAINTAIN THE INTEGRITY
OF THE FORESTS
WITHOUT
DESTROYING THEM.
THE BOOM OF COLONIAL
ECONOMIES BROKE THIS
PATTERN, THUS THE
COLONIZED TERRITORIES
WERE ABSORBED BY
THE WORLD MARKET.
BE IT IN AMERICA, ASIA, OR
AFRICA, THE COMMON GOAL OF
COLONIZERS WAS TO
ESTABLISH SELF-SUFFICIENT
COMMUNITIES IN
AGRICULTURAL AREAS
FOR THE PURPOSES
OF EXPORT.
THEIR INTENTION WAS
TO TAKE FULL ADVANTAGE
OF RESOURCES AT
THE LOWEST COST
WITHOUT CONSIDERING
THE ECOSYSTEM.
THUS A SYSTEM BASED
ON CROP ROTATION
AND THE USE OF FORAGE
WAS IMPLEMENTED
ALONG WITH EXTENSIVE
CATTLE RANCHING.
WHEN THE COLONIES
GOT THEIR POLITICAL
INDEPENDENCE, THIS MODEL
DID NOT CHANGE AS THE
NEW NATIONS WERE STILL
ECONOMICALLY DEPENDENT
ON MARKETS DOMINATED
BY COLONIZING NATIONS.
THE POWERS THAT WERE,
IN CONJUNCTION WITH
INTERNATIONAL
COMMERCE REGULATORS,
CONTINUED THIS PATTERN WELL
INTO THE 20TH CENTURY,
THUS CREATING INSTABILITY,
POVERTY, AND PROVOKING
THE PROGRESSIVE DEGRADATION
OF THE ENVIRONMENT
IN SO-CALLED "THIRD
WORLD" NATIONS.
A KEY MOMENT IN THE
INTENSIVE PROCESS
OF DEFORESTATION WAS
THE IMPLEMENTATION
OF THE SO-CALLED
"GREEN REVOLUTION".
IN 1944 THE ROCKEFELLER
FOUNDATION FINANCED THE
IMPLEMENTATION OF A
SERIES OF TECHNOLOGICAL
IMPROVEMENTS FOR MEXICAN
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTION.
THIS GAVE BIRTH TO THE
MODEL OF AGRICULTURAL
PRODUCTION KNOWN AS THE
GREEN REVOLUTION IN WHICH
HIGH YIELDING CROPS
WERE DEVELOPED BY USING
VERY TECHNICALLY
ADVANCED MONOCULTURE,
BASED ON IRRIGATION,
CHEMICAL FERTILIZATION
AND PESTICIDES.
THROUGHOUT THE SIXTIES
AND SEVENTIES THOSE
TECHNOLOGIES EXPANDED
THROUGHOUT THE PLANET.
THEY WERE QUITE EFFECTIVE
IN HELPING TO REDUCE
HUNGER IN SOME
REGIONS OF THE WORLD,
ESPECIALLY IN ASIA
AND IN LATIN AMERICA.
HOWEVER, THE APPLICATION
OF THIS MODEL HAD
NEFARIOUS CONSEQUENCES
FOR FORESTS.
THESE WERE SUBSTITUTED
BY VAST AREAS
FOR LARGE SCALE
INDUSTRIAL MONOCULTURE.
THE GREEN REVOLUTION
PARTIALLY SOLVED THE
PROBLEM OF HUNGER IN
SOME PARTS OF THE WORLD
BUT ALSO CONTRIBUTED TO THE
LOSS OF LIFE-SUSTAINING
RESOURCES OF RURAL
COMMUNITIES AND TO THEIR
MASS EMIGRATION
TO LARGE CITIES.
WHO IS REALLY RESPONSIBLE
FOR DEFORESTATION?
WHILE THE GREEN REVOLUTION
WAS BEING IMPLEMENTED
SOME EXPERTS AGREED THAT
ONE OF THE MAIN CAUSES
OF DEFORESTATION
WAS THE WAY IN WHICH
POOR FARMERS
USED LUMBER.
THIS IS FALSE.
WHILE THESE EXPERTS DID
THEIR JOBS BY EXPOUNDING
THESE THEORIES, THE TRUE
CAUSANTS OF DESTRUCTION
ALSO DID THEIRS.
THE RESPONSIBILITY
FALLS SQUARELY ON
LUMBER COMPANIES THAT CUT
TREES ON A GRAND SCALE
BOTH ILLEGALLY
AND LEGALLY.
EXPORT CROPS AND
EXTENSIVE CATTLE FARMING
ARE ALSO TO BLAME WHICH
DEMAND THE CLEANING OUT
OF MORE AND MORE ACRES
OF FOREST EACH YEAR.
OTHER AGENTS OF
DESTRUCTION ARE
INDUSTRIAL PLANTATIONS
FOR CELLULOSE, WOOD,
AND OIL PALM TREES
WHICH ARE SUBSTITUTING
VAST AREAS OF
DIVERSITY-RICH FOREST
FOR THE MONOCULTURE
OF EXOTIC SPECIES.
AS WELL AS MINING AND OIL
COMPANIES WHICH CONTINUE
TO PRODUCE WITHOUT
CONSIDERING THE
DESTRUCTION AND
CONTAMINATION OF FORESTS.
ALL OF THESE PROCESSES
HAVE A GRAVE IMPACT
BOTH LOCALLY
AND GLOBALLY.
DEFORESTATION
HAS CREATED POVERTY
AND HAS ENHANCED
THE CONSEQUENCES
OF FLOODING AND
NATURAL DISASTERS.
AMPLE AREAS IN AMERICA,
AFRICA, AND ASIA HAVE
LOST A GREAT DEAL OF
THEIR NATURAL ECOSYSTEM
IN THE LAST
THREE DECADES.
AND ALL FOR WHAT?
WHAT HAVE THEY
ACHIEVED IN EXCHANGE?
HAVE THEY SOLVED THE
PROBLEMS OF POVERTY,
EDUCATION, AND
UNDERDEVELOPMENT?
ABSOLUTELY NOT.
WHAT'S WORSE, THEY'VE
AGGRAVATED THEM.
THE HUMAN DEVELOPMENT DATA
FROM THE UNITED NATIONS
SHOWS THAT IN THESE
COUNTRIES DURING THIS TIME
INEQUALITY AND POVERTY
HAVE INCREASED.
WHO BENEFITS
FROM THIS?
AND WHO'S RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE DEFORESTATION
AND DEGRADATION
OF OUR PLANET?
THOSE WHO CONTINUE TO
BELIEVE IN A SOCIETY
WITHOUT CONSUMER LIMITS,
IN A SYSTEM THAT NEEDS
VERY CHEAP RAW MATERIALS -
WOOD, OIL, AND MINERALS
- IN ORDER TO CREATE
EVER INCREASING DEMAND;
A CONSUMER CULTURE THAT
ENCOURAGES US TO CHANGE
CELL PHONES AND COMPUTERS
EVERY SIX MONTHS;
A CULTURE OF WASTE,
ACCUMULATION,
AND UNCONTROLLED AND
LIMITLESS GROWTH.
THE UNITED STATES, EUROPE,
AND JAPAN, FOR EXAMPLE,
SUSTAIN THEIR ECONOMIES
ON THE PRINCIPLE OF
"BUY MORE AND
PAY LESS".
THIS IS ONLY VIABLE WHEN
ENORMOUS AMOUNTS OF RAW
MATERIALS ARE PURCHASED AT
RIDICULOUSLY LOW PRICES.
GUATEMALA, SENEGAL, AND
BRAZIL ON THE OTHER END
OF THE SCALE ARE FORCED
BY THE INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY FUND AND
WORLD DEVELOPMENT BANKS
TO BASE THEIR
ECONOMIES ON MONOCULTURE
IN ORDER TO SATISFY THIS
DEMAND FOR RAW MATERIALS.
BUT ON THE SIDELINES,
INDIGENOUS POPULATIONS
LOSE THEIR LANDS,
FORESTS DISAPPEAR
AND WORKERS ON LARGE
PLANTATIONS ARE
FORCED TO ACCEPT
SLAVE-LIKE
WORK CONDITIONS.
THIS IS THE ONLY WAY THE
PRICE AND CONSUMPTION
LEVELS IN THE UNITED
STATES, EUROPE, AND JAPAN
CAN BE MAINTAINED.
THIS IS THE VICIOUS
CIRCLE OF THE SYSTEM
OF UNSUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT.
THE AMAZON IS
A CLEAR EXAMPLE
OF WHAT WAS
JUST EXPLAINED.
IT IS THE LARGEST
FOREST IN THE WORLD,
THE "GREAT LUNG"
OF THE EARTH.
THE AIR THAT
HUMANITY BREATHES IN
IS PURIFIED MAINLY IN
THE AMAZON RAINFOREST.
BUT THE PACE OF
ITS DESTRUCTION
IS BREATHTAKING AND HAS
NOT REMITTED SINCE 1970.
UNTIL THAT YEAR,
IN ALL ITS HISTORY
ONLY ONE PERCENT OF ITS
ORIGINAL AREA WAS LOST.
IN THREE DECADES
THE DESTRUCTION RATE
WAS ACCELERATED, AND
BY THE YEAR 2000,
15% OF IT HAD
DISAPPEARED.
IN THE AMAZON THE
PROCESS OF DEFORESTATION
USUALLY BEGINS WITH THE
CONSTRUCTION OF A ROAD.
PERHAPS THE MOST FAMOUS
OF SUCH ROADS IS THE
TRANS-AMAZON ROUTE,
ALTHOUGH THERE ARE MANY
MORE IN THE REGION THAT
HEAD IN EVERY DIRECTION.
THE CONSTRUCTION OF A
ROAD NECESSITATES THE
CLEARING AWAY OF HUNDREDS
OF KILOMETERS OF FORESTS
AND CREATES THE
NECESSARY ACCESS
FOR THOSE WHO CONTINUE
THE DESTRUCTION PROCESS.
WOOD COMPANIES ARE THE
MAIN CULPRITS, WORKING
BOTH WITH LEGAL PERMITS
AND IN CLANDESTINE
OPERATIONS IN CAHOOTS
WITH LOCAL AUTHORITIES.
THE STATE SPONSORED
NETWORK OF ROADS HAS
ENABLED BROSSI, FOR
EXAMPLE, TO INCREASE
ITS LUMBER OUTPUT BY 85%
OVER THE LAST TWO DECADES.
LATELY WE HAVE ALSO
WITNESSED THE INFLUX
OF LARGE AMERICAN,
GERMAN, AND JAPANESE
TRANSNATIONAL INDUSTRIES
UNDER THE AUSPICES
OF INTERNATIONAL LAW.
THE PROCESS OF
DEFORESTATION
FOLLOWS A PATTERN
THAT CAN BE SUMMARIZED
IN THE FOLLOWING WAY:
A ROAD OR PATH IS CLEARED
THAT IS ALMOST ALWAYS
ASSOCIATED WITH SOME KIND
OF INDUSTRIAL EXPLOITATION.
AFTERWARDS FARMERS
ARE BROUGHT IN
TO CLEAR AN AREA THAT
HAS BEEN SLASHED
OF THE FEW TREES AND
STUMPS LEFT STANDING.
THE AREA IS
THEN BURNED
AND CONSECRATED TO
SUBSISTENCE FARMING.
THE SOIL OF THE HUMID
JUNGLE IS VERY INFERTILE.
AFTER JUST A FEW YEARS THE
GROUND LOSES ITS CAPACITY
FOR GROWTH AND FARMERS ARE
DISPLACED TO OTHER AREAS
WHERE THE SAME
PATTERN IS REPEATED.
THE IMPOVERISHED SOIL
THAT IS LEFT BEHIND
IS USED BY CATTLE RANCHERS,
THUS CREATING DEAD LAND
SUBJECT TO FLOODING
AND WITH ALMOST
NO CHANCE OF
BEING REGENERATED.
IN BRAZIL AS WELL AS IN
THE REST OF THE LATIN
AMERICAN COUNTRIES THAT
HAVE LARGE FORESTS,
THESE HAVE SERVED
AS AN ESCAPE VALVE
TO QUELL POTENTIAL
SOCIAL REVOLT.
THE CONCENTRATION OF POWER
AND LAND IN THE HANDS OF
SO FEW HAVE GIVEN
RISE TO THE LARGE
DISPOSSESSED MASSES
CAPABLE OF ORGANIZING
UPRISINGS AGAINST THE STATE
AND DE-FACTO POWERS.
IN ORDER TO AVOID THIS,
BEGINNING IN THE 1970'S
THEY WERE GIVEN THE
CHANCE TO FREELY ACCESS
PORTIONS OF
FOREST LAND.
THE CONSEQUENCES
WERE PREDICTABLE -
THE DESTRUCTION
OF THE FOREST
AND FURTHER
IMPOVERISHMENT OF FARMERS.
BUT WHAT WAS MOST
URGENT WAS TO FIND AN
ESCAPE VALVE FOR
POTENTIAL INSURRECTION.
THE BRAZILIAN AND OTHER
LATIN AMERICAN GOVERNMENTS
INSIST ON CONTINUING
THIS PATTERN WHICH
IN THE LAST YEARS HAS
BEEN GREATLY AGGRAVATED
WITH NEW PLANTATIONS
OF SOY AND OIL PALM.
IN INDONESIA AND MALAYSIA
AS WELL AS IN BRAZIL THE
PRODUCTION OF SOY AND OIL
PALM HAS DONE AWAY WITH
MILLIONS OF HECTARES OF
TROPICAL RAINFOREST.
IN INDONESIA ALONE
TWO MILLION HECTARES
HAVE BEEN
CLEARED AWAY.
OIL PALM IS ORIGINALLY
FROM CENTRAL AFRICA
WHERE IT IS THE
BASIC CROP FOR
THE SUSTENANCE
OF SMALL FARMERS.
BUT IN OTHER CORNERS OF
THE WORLD IT HAS BECOME
BIG BUSINESS WITH LITTLE
REGARD FOR THE ENVIRONMENT.
PALM OIL IS THE SECOND MOST
CONSUMED OIL IN THE WORLD
AFTER SOYBEAN OIL AND IT IS
USED IN A BEVY OF PRODUCTS
FROM SHAMPOOS
TO FRENCH FRIES,
COSMETICS, AND
FROZEN FOODS.
COMMERCIAL PLANTATIONS
OF OIL PALM HAVE SPREAD
THROUGHOUT THE TROPICS,
ESPECIALLY IN ASIA AND
PARTICULARLY IN INDONESIA
AND PAPUA NEW GUINEA
WHERE THEY ARE
THE MAIN CAUSE
OF THE DESTRUCTION OF
TROPICAL RAINFORESTS.
THESE PLANTATIONS ARE
USUALLY ESTABLISHED
IN FIELDS THAT HAVE
BEEN CLEARED OF PRIMARY
OR SECONDARY
JUNGLE BY BURNING.
THE DESIRE TO ESTABLISH
THESE PLANTATIONS WAS
PART OF THE REASON FOR
THE OUT-OF-CONTROL FIRES
THAT DEVASTATED RAINFORESTS
IN INDONESIA IN 1997.
THESE FIRES AND THE
COMPANIES THAT STARTED
THEM ARE RESPONSIBLE
FOR THE HUNDREDS OF
COMMUNITIES THAT HAVE HAD
TO BE DISPLACED TO THE
GHETTOS OF LARGE CITIES
WHILE FLEEING THEIR LANDS.
A SINGLE PLANTATION
OF PALM OIL REQUIRES
A VAST AREA IF IT IS
TO PRODUCE BENEFITS.
IN SOUTHEAST ASIA EVERY
PALM PRODUCING COMPANY
HAS AN AVERAGE OF
10,000 TO 25,000 HECTARES
AND THE SAME OCCURS WITH
SOYBEAN PLANTATIONS.
AS WE DIVE INTO THE 21ST
CENTURY, DEFORESTATION
RATES IN THE AMAZON
ARE INCREASING YEARLY.
THE MAIN CAUSE OF THIS IS
THE PRESSURE TO CLEAR AWAY
FOREST LAND FOR THE
FARMING OF SOYBEANS.
THE PRODUCTION OF MEAT
IN EUROPE IS HIGHLY
SUBSIDIZED AND REQUIRES A
MASSIVE SUPPLY OF CEREAL
TO FEED CATTLE.
SOYBEAN IS ONE OF
THE RAW MATERIALS
OF THAT CHAIN
OF PRODUCTION.
BUT WHO IS HIDING BEHIND
THIS DEVASTATION?
SOYBEAN COMMERCE AND
PROCESSING IS AN INDUSTRY
DOMINATED BY A
SMALL NUMBER OF LARGE
INTERNATIONAL
COMPANIES THAT CONTROL
THE BUSINESS OF
BASIC COMMODITIES
IN THE UNITED
STATES AND EUROPE.
THESE COMPANIES ARE
FINANCED AND SOMETIMES
EVEN SUBSIDIZED BY
STATE GOVERNMENTS AND BY
FINANCIAL ORGANIZATIONS
SUCH AS THE WORLD BANK
AND THE INTERNATIONAL
MONETARY FUND.
THESE INSTITUTIONS FORCE
POOR COUNTRIES - PRECISELY
THE ONES THAT SUPPLY THEM
WITH CHEAP RAW MATERIALS
- TO LIBERALIZE
THEIR ECONOMIES.
THEY'RE FORCED TO
ELIMINATE THEIR TARIFF
BARRIERS AND TO REDUCE
STATE SPENDING TO CREATE
THE NECESSARY LEGAL AND
ECONOMIC CONDITIONS
SO THAT THE LARGE
MULTINATIONALS CAN ACT
WITH IMPUNITY WITHOUT ANY
REGARD FOR THE ENVIRONMENT
OR THE RIGHTS OF WORKERS.
THOUGH PARADOXICAL, LARGE
FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS
ARE KEY PLAYERS IN THE
PROCESS OF DEFORESTATION
AND THE IMPOVERISHMENT
OF DEVELOPING NATIONS.
THE PROGRAMS PROPOSED BY THE
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND,
THE WORLD BANK, AND THE
WORLD TRADE ORGANIZATION
SUPPORT AND LAUNCH MACRO
ECONOMIC STRATEGIES
DESIGNED TO PRODUCE
IMMEDIATE RETURNS
INSTEAD OF LONG TERM
SUSTAINABILITY.
THEIR POLICIES HAVE
LED TO THE DEGRADATION
OF FORESTS, TO DIRE
SOCIAL CONSEQUENCES,
AND TO GENERAL
IMPOVERISHMENT.
MORE PEOPLE DIE IN
THE WORLD DUE TO
WORK CONDITIONS ON
PLANTATIONS OWNED BY
LARGE CORPORATIONS THAN TO
INTERNATIONAL TERRORISM.
THIS IS TRULY A
GLOBAL PROBLEM.
BANANA PLANTATIONS
DID TO THE FORESTS
IN THE 20TH CENTURY WHAT
SOYBEAN AND OIL PALM
HAVE DONE IN
RECENT YEARS.
THE FORESTS OF CENTRAL
AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
WERE DECIMATED
BY MULTINATIONALS
THAT SPECIALIZED
IN DEVASTATION.
THEY WERE THE FIRST
AND ARE STILL AT
THE TOP OF THEIR CLASS
IN THIS SINISTER RANKING.
IN TERMS OF GROSS VALUE OF
PRODUCTION, BANANA IS
THE FOURTH MOST IMPORTANT
CROP IN THE WORLD,
AFTER RICE,
WHEAT, AND CORN.
LATIN AMERICA DOMINATES
THE WORLD BANANA INDUSTRY
WHICH GROWS
IN MOST CASES
IN
LARGE MONOCULTURE PLANTATIONS.
BANANA IS A BASIC FOOD
PRODUCT THAT IS HIGHLY
DEMANDED IN THE
NORTHERN HEMISPHERE,
ESPECIALLY IN EUROPE
AND THE UNITED STATES.
THE WORLD BANANA TRADE
IS PRACTICALLY DOMINATED
BY THREE MULTINATIONAL
COMPANIES.
90% OF WHAT THE CONSUMER
PAYS STAYS IN THE NORTH,
NEVER REACHING
THE PRODUCER,
MUCH LESS THE FARMER.
IF LATIN AMERICAN
BANANAS ARE THE CHEAPEST
IT IS BECAUSE IN THOSE
PLANTATIONS BASIC WORKERS'
RIGHTS AND ENVIRONMENTAL
PROBLEMS ARE IGNORED.
IF THESE COSTS WERE ADDED,
IF DIGNIFIED SALARIES
WERE PAID AND ENVIRONMENTAL
CONCERNS WERE ADDRESSED,
THIS DIFFERENCE
WOULD DISAPPEAR.
BANANA PLANTATIONS IN
LATIN AMERICA DEPEND ON
LARGE AMOUNTS OF PESTICIDES
FOR THEIR PRODUCTION.
IN MANY CASES THESE
PESTICIDES WERE
FORBIDDEN IN OTHER
PLACES; HOWEVER,
WORKERS HERE USE THEM
WITHOUT ANY PROTECTION.
ACCORDING TO STUDIES
CONDUCTED AT HEREDIA
NATIONAL UNIVERSITY
IN COSTA RICA,
AN INCREASE IN CASES
OF STERILITY AND CANCER
WAS FOUND AMONG
BANANA FARMERS.
SPRAYING AND RAIN-INDUCED
SPREADING OF PESTICIDES
CONTAMINATE THE WATER
THESE WORKERS, THEIR
FAMILIES, AND NEIGHBORING
COMMUNITIES USE.
BANANA COMPANIES AND
EXPANSION PRESSURE FARMERS
WHO LIVE ON THE PERIPHERY
OF THEIR PLANTATIONS
TO SELL THEIR LANDS.
FARMERS WHO RESIST
ARE DENIED CREDIT
UNTIL THEY GIVE IN AND
BECOME SALARIED WORKERS
ON THE PLANTATION.
ON THESE PLANTATIONS NOW
IN THE 21ST CENTURY
EITHER THERE
ARE NO UNIONS
OR THEY ARE ON THE
COMPANY'S PAYROLL.
WORKERS BARELY
SUBSIST AND GENERALLY
THEY'RE FIRED
BEFORE THEY MUST BE
GRANTED SOME FORM
OF SOCIAL BENEFIT.
THESE ARE THE PRECARIOUS
AND INSECURE CONDITIONS
THAT MAKE WORKERS
AND THEIR FAMILIES
FODDER FOR
ENDEMIC POVERTY.
THIS IS HOW LOW BANANA
PRICES CAN BE MAINTAINED.
AND THE SAME APPLIES TO
SOYBEAN AND OIL PALM.
THIS IS YET ANOTHER
VICIOUS CIRCLE OF
UNSUSTAINED DEVELOPMENT
AND DEFORESTATION.
ASIA IS EXPERIENCING RAPID
DEFORESTATION AS WELL.
THE INDUSTRIAL REVOLUTION
IN GREAT BRITAIN REQUIRED
THE CONSTRUCTION OF A
RAILWAY NETWORK IN THE
FAR EAST TO TRANSPORT
RAW MATERIALS TO PORTS
FROM WHICH THEY
WERE SENT TO EUROPE.
THE CONSTRUCTION OF THIS
VAST NETWORK ENTAILED THE
DESTRUCTION OF MILLIONS
OF HECTARES OF FOREST.
AFTER THE INDEPENDENCE
OF ASIAN COUNTRIES,
THINGS DID NOT
CHANGE MUCH.
LAWS PROTECTING FORESTS
IN COUNTRIES SUCH AS
INDIA OR INDONESIA FORBID
WOMEN IN RURAL AREAS
TO PICK BRANCHES
AND FODDER
BUT THEY DON'T LIMIT
ACCESS TO LUMBER COMPANIES
THAT HAVE CONTINUED
THE DEVASTATION.
IN RECENT YEARS,
GOVERNMENTS OF ASIAN
NATIONS HAVE PROMOTED
THE IDEA THAT THEY ARE
REGENERATING
THEIR FORESTS.
IN FACT, WHAT THEY HAVE
DONE IS SUBSTITUTE
LOCAL SPECIES FOR
EUCALYPTUS AND PINE
WITH AN EYE ON
INDUSTRIAL DEMAND
AND NOT ON THE NEED OF
THE LOCAL POPULATION.
EUCALYPTUS AND PINE ARE
SPECIES THAT RETAIN WATER
AND THUS KILL OFF
SURROUNDING BUSHES
WHICH LOCAL WOMEN DEPEND
ON TO GET BRANCHES.
THIS TASK, WHICH ONCE
TOOK ONLY HALF AN HOUR,
NOW TAKES BETWEEN
THREE TO SIX HOURS AND
REQUIRES THE ASSISTANCE
OF THEIR DAUGHTERS,
FORCING THEM
TO MISS SCHOOL.
BUT THE CASE IN ASIA
IS NO EXCEPTION.
BEING ECOLOGICAL IS
FASHIONABLE, THOUGH THIS
FASHION IS IN PART A COVER
FOR BOGUS REHABILITATION
PROJECTS THAT ARE REALLY
NEW FORMS OF EXPLOITATION.
SOME COUNTRIES,
ESPECIALLY IN EUROPE,
BOAST AN INCREASE
IN FOREST AREA.
THAT IS A TRICKY
ASSERTION.
FIRST OF ALL, MUCH
OF THIS RECOVERED AREA
IS USED FOR MONOCULTURE
AND IS QUITE
LESS DIVERSE THAN
IT USED TO BE.
ON THE OTHER HAND,
THE CONSERVATION
OF THESE FORESTS
HAS BEEN ACHIEVED
AT THE EXPENSE
OF OTHER COUNTRIES' FORESTS.
CHINA AND THAILAND,
FOR EXAMPLE,
HAVE FORBIDDEN THEIR
TREES TO BE CUT
BUT THEY ARE
THEMSELVES RESPONSIBLE
FOR SLASHING FORESTS
IN NEIGHBORING COUNTRIES.
BUT LET'S GO BACK
TO LATIN AMERICA.
AFTER WORLD WAR II THE
TOTAL AREA OF PASTURES
IN CENTRAL
AMERICA DOUBLED
AT THE EXPENSE OF
TROPICAL RAINFORESTS.
THE NUMBER OF HEADS
OF CATTLE ALSO DOUBLED
WHILE THE
CONSUMPTION OF BEEF
BY CITIZENS OF CENTRAL
AMERICAN NATIONS
DIMINISHED YEAR
AFTER YEAR.
THE PRODUCTION OF BEEF
WAS EXPORTED TO MARKETS
IN THE UNITED
STATES AND EUROPE.
IN THE SIXTIES AND
SEVENTIES ENORMOUS
EXTENSIONS OF AMAZON
RAINFOREST IN BRAZIL
WERE DESTROYED TO MAKE
WAY FOR CATTLE FARMS
WITH MILLIONS OF
HEADS OF CATTLE.
THESE HACIENDAS WERE
DESIGNED TO COVER THE
DEMAND OF THE
INTERNATIONAL BEEF MARKET
AND WERE FINANCED AND
BUILT WITH FUNDS FROM
INTERNATIONAL DEVELOPMENT
ORGANIZATIONS.
SOMETHING SIMILAR OCCURRED
IN COLUMBIA AND PERU.
DEVELOPMENT MEANT
AND STILL MEANS THE
DESTRUCTION OF FORESTS TO
MAKE WAY FOR BUSINESSES
THAT CLASH WITH THE
INTERESTS OF THE FORESTS
AND WITH THOSE OF THE
LOCAL POPULATION.
IN ALL THESE CASES,
HACIENDAS PROVED TO BE
UNPRODUCTIVE IN
LESS THAN TEN YEARS.
BUT WAS THAT THE
END OF THE BUSINESS?
NO. ONCE THE FOREST WAS
EXTERMINATED AND RENDERED
LIFELESS, CATTLE RANCHERS
OBTAINED NEW CONCESSIONS
TO SLASH NEW FORESTS.
AND SO THE VICIOUS
CIRCLE OF DESTRUCTION
GOES ROUND AND ROUND
LIKE AN ENDLESS CARROUSEL
WITH NO END IN SIGHT.
THE PRINCIPLE CAUSE OF
SUCH GROWTH IS THE DEMAND
FOR HAMBURGER MEAT BY
FAST FOOD RESTAURANTS.
THREE DECADES AGO
WHEN THE PROCESS BEGAN
A KILOGRAM OF BEEF IN LATIN
AMERICA COST AROUND $1.50
AND MORE THAN $3.00
IN THE UNITED STATES.
BUT THERE WAS A COST THAT
WAS NEVER FACTORED IN:
THE COST OF THE
DISAPPEARANCE OF
THOUSANDS OF HECTARES
OF VIRGIN RAINFOREST
IN THE WHOLE CONTINENT.
AND ALL FOR WHAT?
LET US GO BACK TO OUR
EARLIER QUESTION:
DID LATIN
AMERICANS ACHIEVE
HIGHER DEGREES
OF DEVELOPMENT?
DID THEY ERADICATE POVERTY,
MALNUTRITION, ILLITERACY?
ABSOLUTELY NOT.
THE LEVELS OF HUMAN
DEVELOPMENT ESTIMATED BY
THE UNITED NATIONS SHOW
THAT IN ALL QUANTIFIABLE
ASPECTS OF LIFE COUNTRIES
SUCH AS BRAZIL, BOLIVIA,
PERU, AND VENEZUELA
ARE WORSE OFF NOW
THAN THEY WERE
BEFORE THE PILLAGING.
IT IS THE SO-CALLED
"HAMBURGER EFFECT",
THE DIRECT CORRELATION
BETWEEN AN INCREASE IN
BEEF CONSUMPTION IN
NORTHERN COUNTRIES AND
DEFORESTATION AND THE LOSS
OF WEALTH AND BIODIVERSITY
IN LATIN AMERICA AND
THE REST OF THE WORLD.
AS THERE'S A HAMBURGER
EFFECT THERE IS ALSO
A SOYBEAN EFFECT,
AN OIL PALM EFFECT,
AND A PRECIOUS
WOOD EFFECT.
WE BUY CHEAP - VERY CHEAP
- BUT IT IS THE FORESTS
AND LOCAL POPULATIONS
THAT PAY THE DIFFERENCE.
ARE WE IN TIME TO
AVERT DISASTER?
IS IT POSSIBLE TO
HALT DEFORESTATION?
IN THE SHORT TERM
IT SEEMS IMPROBABLE.
THE INERTIA OF
THE CURRENT SYSTEM
OF PRODUCTION AND
CONSUMPTION MAKE IT A
VERY DIFFICULT SHORT
TERM TASK INDEED.
HOWEVER, IF
THERE'S A MIRACLE,
IF AT SOME POINT IN
TIME WE ARE ABLE TO
UNDERSTAND THE TRUE
VALUE OF FORESTS,
IT COULD BE POSSIBLE
TO REVERSE THIS TREND.
ONE OF THE MOST
IMMEDIATE POSSIBILITIES
FOR STOPPING DEFORESTATION
IS THE CREATION
OF A NETWORK OF
PROTECTED AREAS
AGAINST
OUT-OF-CONTROL EXPLOITATION.
THE GOAL IS FOR ALL
COUNTRIES TO PROTECT
AT LEAST 12% OF THEIR
TERRITORY IN ORDER TO
CONSERVE ITS NATURAL
FLORAL AND FAUNA.
BUT THIS IS
A PROPOSITION
THAT IS FAR FROM
BECOMING REALITY.
THE ALTERNATIVE
TO DEFORESTATION
IS NOT TO
HALT DEVELOPMENT
BUT TO PROMOTE
SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT.
THERE ARE A NUMBER OF
POSITIVE AND PRACTICAL
PROPOSALS THAT CAN BE
WIDELY IMPLEMENTED.
ONE OF THEM IS
AGRO FORESTRY,
THE PRACTICE OF
ESTABLISHING ANIMAL
OR CROP FARMS WITHIN
THE PRESENCE OF FORESTS.
THESE ARE MIXED
PLANTATIONS IN WHICH
TREES ARE AN INTEGRAL
PART OF THE PROPERTY.
IT IS A PROVEN TOOL FOR THE
IMPROVEMENT OF LAND USE
AND FOR THE INCREASE OF
AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTIVITY.
ECO-TOURISM IS
ANOTHER SUSTAINABLE
DEVELOPMENT POSSIBILITY.
MANY TERRITORIES THAT
MAINTAINED THEIR NATURAL
HERITAGE RECEIVED
NEW INCOME -
INCOME FROM TOURISM.
A NATURE PARK AND ALL
THE SERVICES IT ENTAILS
CREATES MORE
HIGH QUALITY JOBS
THAN A SOYBEAN OR
BANANA PLANTATION.
THE VERY EXPLOITATION
OF WOOD IS POSSIBLE
IF IT IS DONE
RATIONALLY.
IT IS ESTIMATED THAT
WORLD DEMAND FOR WOOD PULP
COULD BE SATISFIED WITH
PLANTATIONS THAT TAKE UP
ONLY 3% OF THE WORLD'S
FOREST RESERVE.
IF THIS WERE WELL
REGULATED AND ORGANIZED,
ALL OTHER FORESTS COULD
BE USED TOWARDS THE
ACHIEVEMENT OF PURELY
ENVIRONMENTAL OBJECTIVES.
FORESTS HAVE TRADITIONALLY
BEEN UNDERRATED.
ON THE OTHER HAND,
THEY OFFER A PLETHORA
OF RESOURCES IF
THEY'RE TAKEN CARE OF.
ANY EFFORT UNDERTAKEN TO
HALT DEFORESTATION MUST BE
BASED ON THE UNDERSTANDING
OF THOSE WHO ARE ITS VERY
CAUSANTS, OF ITS CAUSES,
AND OF ITS ALTERNATIVES.
CIRCUMSTANCES VARY FROM
COUNTRY TO COUNTRY,
BUT THERE
IS STILL TIME.
WE HAVE THE TECHNOLOGY TO
PRODUCE A CHANGE IN THIS
PROCESS AS WELL AS THE
NECESSARY STRATEGIES
TO IMPLEMENT THEM.
ALL THAT IS NEEDED IS THE
POLITICAL WILL TO DO SO.
IT IS TIME FOR ALL NATIONS
TO RENEW THEIR PROMISE
TO LIVE IN HARMONY WITH
TROPICAL RAINFORESTS
BEFORE WE LOSE
THEM FOREVER.